
subspace billing server protocol proposal
version 1.3.1
grelminar@yahoo.com


all communication goes over a single tcp socket. messages are lines,
delimited by linefeed characters (ascii 10) (although servers and
clients should accept CR, LF, and CRLF). fields within a message are
delimited by colons (ascii 58). the first field is the type of the
message. each type has a fixed number of fields to expect, so the last
field can contain colons without confusing anything. integer values in
fields should be in decimal. all lines will be no more than 1023
characters in length (including LF). either side may discard lines
longer than that length if it receives them.

the game server will initiate a tcp connection to the billing server on
the agreed port.

(from now on, I'm going to get lazy, and call the game server "the
server", and the billing server "the biller". i'll use g->b and b->g to
describe the two directions.)

the protocol is versioned with a three-part number (major revision,
minor revision, patch). backwards compatbility is guaranteed when two
version differ only by the patch number. when two versions differ by a
major or minor revision number, all bets are off.

the server sends the protocol version that it speaks to the biller. if
the biller supports it (and everything else is ok), the biller can reply
successfully and a connection is established. if the biller doesn't
support the version requested (module the patch number), or if anything
else is wrong with the login, it should return failure and close the
connection. no further protocol version negociation takes places.


::::: server login stuff

to login:
g->b: "CONNECT:version:swname:zonename:hostname:password"
    version is the version of the protocol used. it should have three
    numbers separated by dots (major, minor, patch). the current version
    is at the top of this document.
    swname is something idenifying the software used, like "asss 1.0.5".
    zonename is the name of this zone, like "A Small Warzone".
    hostname is where this zone is hosted, like "SSCX".
    password is a password to authenticate this zone.

the response will either be this:
b->g: "CONNECTOK:swname:billername"
    swname is something identifying the biller used, like "mybiller 0.29".
    billername is a string identifying this biller network, like "SSC".
or
b->g: "CONNECTBAD:swname:billername:reason"
    swname and billername are as above.
    reason is something describing why the connection was refused, like
    "bad password", or "wrong protocol version".

the biller will most likely close the connection after sending a
CONNECTBAD, but if it doesn't, the game server should.

the rest can only be used after a successful connection.


::::: player login stuff

game sends:
g->b: "PLOGIN:pid:flag:name:pw:ip:macid:contid"
    pid is the player id assigned to this player by the server.
    flag is 0 for a normal login, 1 for "i want to create a new player".
    name is the name that's trying to log in.
    pw is the password he's using.
    ip is the address he's connecting from (in dotted decimal).
    macid is the standard machine id of the player.
    contid is the id data from continuum players. if the player isn't
    using cont, it should be empty. if the player is using cont, it will
    be the cont id, encoded in 128 characters, using plain hex encoding
    with lowercase letters.

biller responds with either:
b->g: "POK:pid:rtext:name:squad:billerid:usage:firstused"
    pid is the player id that was passed in PLOGIN.
    rtext is additional text that can be delivered to the client. if
    there are no complications logging in, it should be empty.
    name is the name assigned by the biller (the biller can change the
    name of a player if desired).
    squad is the player's squad.
    billerid is an id number assigned by the billing server.
    usage is the number of seconds that this player has ever been
    connected to this biller.
    firstused is a string describing when this named account was
    created, in roughly this form: "1-2-1999 6:13:35"
or
b->g: "PBAD:pid:newname:rtext"
    pid is the player id passed in PLOGIN.
    newname is 1 if the requested name doesn't exist in the biller's
    database and is available for creation. it is 0 otherwise.
    rtext is some text describing the reason this login was denied.


::::: player registration (optional)

_before_ sending a POK, the biller can request registration information
by sending:
b->g: "WANTREG:pid"
    pid is the pid for which registration information is requested.

the server may eventually respond:
g->b: "REGDATA:pid:data"
    pid is the pid of the player whose information is being submitted.
    data is hex-encoded binary data containing the registration
    information. the format or length of this data is not specified in
    this document, and may be client-specific.


::::: banners

the biller can send this any any time, but will typically send it right
after a PLOGINOK message:
b->g: "BNR:pid:banner"
    pid is the pid of the player setting his banner.
    banner is a 96-byte banner, encoded using standard hex encoding with
    lowercase letters, so it will be 192 bytes long.

when a player sets his banner, the server will update the biller with:
g->b: "BNR:pid:banner"
    pid the the pid of the player setting his banner.
    banner is the new banner, encoded as above.


::::: player status changes

when a player enters an arena for the first time after logging in, the
server sends:
g->b: "PENTERARENA:pid"


when a player disconnects from the server, the server sends:
g->b: "PLEAVE:pid"


the biller can request that the server disconnect a player by sending:
b->g: "PKICK:pid:reason"
    pid is the pid of the player to be kicked.
    reason is some text describing the reason the player was kicked.


::::: messaging

when a player sends a ?chat message, the server sends:
g->b: "CHAT:pid:channel:sound:text"
    pid is the sending player.
    channel is the name of the channel. alternatively, it can be a
    number signifying which of the player's channels the message is
    intended for.
    sound is a sound code, to be interpreted by the client.
    text is the text of the message.

when a player gets a ?chat message, the server receives:
b->g: "CHATTXT:channel:sender:sound:text"
b->g: "CHAT:pid:number"
    channel is the name of the channel that this message is on.
    sender is the name of the player who sent the message.
    sound is a sound code.
    text is the text of the message.
    pid is the pid of a player who received the message.
    number is what channel that player should see the message as coming
    from.

    the CHATTXT message is used so that the biller can send a chat
    message to many players on one server without sending the full text
    and sender name to each of them. the contents of the CHATTXT message
    should be cached on the server, and the text used for any following
    CHAT messages, until the next CHATTXT. for example, if the server
    gets "CHATTXT:sscx:player:0:hello" and then "CHAT:22:3", player 22
    should see something like "3:player> hello".


when a player sends a remote private message:
g->b: "RMT:pid:destination:sound:text"
    pid is the pid of the sending player.
    destination is the player the message is being sent to.
    sound is a sound code.
    text is the text of a message.

when a player receives a remove private message:
b->g: "RMT:pid:sender:sound:text"
    pid is the pid of the player receiving the message.
    sender is the name of the sending player.
    sound is a sound code.
    text is the text of the message.

when a player sends a squad message:
g->b: "RMTSQD:pid:destsquad:sound:text"
    pid is the pid of the sender.
    destsquad is the name of the squad whose players should receive the
    message (no leading #).
    sound is a sound code.
    text is the text of the message.

when a player receives a squad message:
b->g: "RMTSQD:destsquad:sender:sound:text"
    destsquad is the squad that the message is for.
    sender is the name of the sending player.
    sound is a sound code.
    text is the text of the message.


when a player types a command that the server doesn't interpret, or that
the server knows should go to the billing server:
g->b: "CMD:pid:cmdname:args"
    pid is the pid of the sending player.
    cmdname is the name of the command.
    args is the arguments to the command (what was typed after the
    command name.


when the server wants to send a player some message (usually as the
result of a command):
b->g: "MSG:pid:sound:text"
    pid is the pid of the recipient.
    sound is a sound code.
    text is the text of the message.


when the server wants to send some of its log output to the biller,
perhaps so logs document malicious activity can be gatherd and analyzed
for many zones at once, it can send:
g->b: "LOG:pid:logtext"
    if the log message refers to the activity of a specific player, the
    pid field will hold the pid of that player. if not, it should be
    empty (zero-length).
    logtext is the text of the log message, in whatever format the
    server chooses.


if the biller wants to send a message to only staff members of a zone,
it can send:
b->g: "STAFFMSG:sender:sound:text"
    sender is the optional name of whoever sent this message. if it was
    generated by the billing server, it should be empty.
    sound is a sound code.
    text is the text of the message.


if the biller wants to send a message to the entire zone (e.g., for
scheduled downtime or other important events), it can send:
b->g: "BROADCAST:sender:sound:text"
    sender is the optional name of whoever sent this message. if it was
    generated by the billing server, it should be empty.
    sound is a sound code.
    text is the text of the message.


if the server is going down (for a shutdown or whatever), it should
close the tcp socket. if the biller is going down (for any reason), it
should close the tcp socket.


::::: misc.

either side is allowed to send ping messages which act as a keepalive to
force tcp to detect when one or the other side of the connection crashes
or becomes unavailable. a suggested interval between pings is 180
seconds, although neither side should assume anything about the interval
that the other side is using, and should send its own keepalives if it
wants quick notification if the other side crashes or becomes
unavailable.

b->g: "PING"
g->b: "PING"


the biller can indicate that it's time for a scorereset by sending:
b->g: "SCORERESET"


# dist: public

